um but one of the seminal studies in the
field of dementia prevention is referred
to it's known as the Sprint mind trial
which found that when people were with
hypertension were aggressively treated
via pharmacological means for their
hypertension they saw a dramatic risk
reduction for the development of
cognitive cognitive impairment U mild
cognitive impairment in fact which is
considered like a pre a pro prodrome of
dementia a form of pre-dementia if you
will um but we know that you know
lifestyle modification dietary
exercise for example all are you know as
effective as drugs and um when you're
when you have hypertension essentially
the blood vessels that are supplying
blood nutrients oxygen um to the brain
are essentially damaged and so yeah
hypertension is incredibly damaging to
the brain okay you said there were 12 I
think we should can we go through all of
them we can go through yeah I mean so
those are the those are the ones that I
think that are Mo that are most relevant
to diet
but I think it's important at at this
you know juncture
to state that diet is not the only
nutrition is not the only variable here
so I'll never know what caused my mom's
dementia um unfortunately although it's
a it's a you know an investigation
that's going to continue on through the
rest of my life but you know nutrition
is one slice of the pie and so among the
the modifiable risk factors you have you
know non-nutrition related um risk
factors such as exposure to excessive
air pollution on a chronic basis which
as of the 2020 Lancet Commission on
dementia was finally acknowledged as
being a risk factor for the for the
development of dementia um we've seen
studies run in for example uh Mexico
City um where they've seen pathological
changes that are associated with
Alzheimer's disease in the cavers of
adolescence and children you know people
who have who have died in Mexico City
who have been exposed um over the course
of their lives to you know excessive
levels of air pollution like fine
particulate matter pm2.5 for example
that they see an undue aggregate of you
know amalo beta for example which is the
the the protein that forms the plaques
that you know is one of the defining
infammatory consequence too or does
anybody know yes it is yeah there's an
inflammatory consequence there's a
cardiovascular consequence to being
exposed to air pollution um with regard
to your iov vascular system we know that
what's good for the heart is good for
the brain um and conversely what's bad
for the heart is bad for the brain and
so air pollution you know plays a major
a major role um an area that uh I think
is incredibly exciting um also very
scary but but ultimately empowering is
you know looking at certain
environmental pollutants um like certain
industrial solvents for example um
there's a compound that there's another
fantastic neur neurologist who uh has
become a friend and colleague and I
think his work is incredibly important
his name is Ray dorsy Dr Ray dorsy he's
a University of Rochester
neurologist who has done a lot of work
um exposing the link between exposure to
certain chemical solvents that are still
in W widely being used in the United
States like TR chloroethylene and
perchloroethylene and the ideology of
Parkinson's disease and related
conditions like Louis body dementia
which is the condition that my mom
suffered from um um and so we know that
you know what we breathe what we eat
these are all having an impact on our
health but now the evidence is really
starting to emerge that you know that
the brain is not you know does not sit
in this privileged Ivory Tower where
it's immune somehow to you know what it
is that we're eating and the compounds
that we're you know inhaling the brain
sits directly downwind of you know a lot
of the insults that are being waged by
modern life modern living you know the
the the the trappings of modern society
come at a cost and we're starting to see
that they now have are likely having an
impingement in our Collective brain
health so you know one of these
compounds TR chloroethylene which I I I
just referenced is still being used to
spot clean in dry cleaning applications
and it's an incredibly volatile compound
it readily evaporates it easily you know
infiltrates
groundwater
um and uh
obviously occupational exposure to these
compounds is really bad um but there
have been a a a small handful of
epidemiologic studies that show that
exposure to to a compound like tce for
example is associated with a 500%
increased risk of the development of
Parkinson's
disease um this is a compound that was
used medically up until the 70s it was
used with you know to decaffeinate
Coffee it was used as a anesthetic for
pregnant women
um it's still being used as a metal
Degreaser and again it's used to spot
clean in dry cleaning applications now
I'm skeptical of all my suits yeah well
you definitely want to not dry clean or
at least make sure that the dry cleaner
that you're using is a a quote unquote
Dre uh green dry cleaner because you
know I think they'll be less likely to
be using these kinds of compounds um but
it's really scary stuff my mom was
somebody who worked in the Garment
industry um in New York City and so you
know she likely was exposed to these
kinds of of compounds on a regular basis
um certain herbicides and pesticides we
know are you know occupationally linked
to these kinds of conditions like
Parkinson's disease we breathe them in
through our nose right they have they
don't undergo the same degree of
detoxification as an ingested compound
they can very easily bypass the bloodb
brain barrier you know they access the
old factory bulb actually um a decline
in sense of smell is one of the earliest
features of a preclinical feature of
cognitive decline dementia and even
parkinsonism and so you know as far as
these conditions are these these
compounds are in our environment I think
that that's you know on the one hand
it's very scary but it's also empowering
the more awareness that we can have
about reducing our exposure to these
compounds I think it's it's crucially
important so that's you know that's
another of the the modifiable RIS yeah
that's on the toxic exposure side yeah
which I think is incredibly important my
second book The genius life was really
you know looked at that AR you know how
much of the how much of an overlap do
you think there is between the dietary
risk and the toxic exposure risk because
obviously well and we'll get into this
after we're done this section of the
conversation but
obviously there's the carbohydrate
diabetes obesity link but then there's
food toxicity link too yeah because lots
of things that we think are edible would
rather not be eaten and they have well I
mean I've known for years that the
typical plant people are worried about
the pesticides that are on plants and
fair enough but they're not nearly as
worried about the pesticides that are in
plants and there are plenty of them
because well plants don't like being
eaten by bugs and most of them aren't
that happy about being eaten by us
either and so they have got very potent
chemical defenses and they're not
trivial and I've wondered because of my
experiences with diet I mean I lost a
lot of weight because of the diet that
I'm on and I kept it off and that's
quite the bloody Miracle that's for sure
it's really something to like I weigh
what I weighed when I was in my 20s you
know that's really something when you're
62 it's like what the hell who knew that
was possible and I have about the same
bodily composition that I did when I was
in my 20s
and some of that's obviously from not
eating carbohydrates
but there are other improvements that
I've experienced that have made me
wonder like I I had psoriasis it's gone
and some of the psoriasis patches had
lasted well literally decades and
they're gone and I think oh
well I was obviously eating something
that was causing that is that
carbohydrate linked who the hell knows
but is it food toxicity linked or or
immunological allergic I don't know well
I think that most people and this is
where the whole the you know the the
debate about the carnivore diet and and
all that I think becomes really
interesting um you know a robust
organism such as yourself should be able
to consume some of these plant quote
unquote defense compounds and Garner a
degree of you know additional strength
in so doing right there's this notion of
hormesis where you know low doses of a
of a certain stressor you know or
toxicant if you will might actually
cause a a response in the system that
actually leads to an upleveling of
robustness of vigor of strength
pharmacon means something like a little
bit of the poison that kills you cures
you
yeah and so that's where I think if you
have a robust for example gut microbiome
you know um I think that most people
should be able to derive value from
these kinds of of of compounds that's
the theory I mean when you look at the
average Health state of the typical
person it makes you wonder right and
I've wondered how far down the rabbit
hole you have to go to get to the bottom
given how obese people are and well what
I've seen as the consequences of a
relatively radical dietary shift so well
that's obviously one of the reasons I
wanted to talk to you today let's let's
turn then we went through quite a few of
the modifiable risk factors let's turn
from that if that's okay unless there's
any others that you'd like to
specifically highlight we could turn to
that to what you have been what you
found in relationship to diet and what
you've been recommending so are there
other modifiable risk factors that you
think are worth concentrating on we went
through diet and exposure to pollutants
and toxicity any anything else that's
directly relevant yeah well there's a a
newly identified risk factor and that is
hearing loss um and that's you know
again newly identified so all the the
the verdict the all the research the the
research that we need to make you know
clear recommendations other than if you
have hearing loss a hearing aid actually
is a potentially you know can be a a
potential boom to health oh oh so it's
actually the loss of the auditory input
yeah and not a correlation between the
degeneration of the ear and the
degeneration of the brain or may both
corre no I mean I think in so far as we
know that social isolation which is
which is another yeah you become more
and more isolated you know in your in
your own world and I think that that's
probably harmful we know that depression
yeah sure um sure depression is another
one uhhuh and and you know these are
these estimates are are typically
conservative so I I said at the onset
about 40% which was the number that was
given you know most recently in this
2020 lanet Commission on on dementia
prevention but I think that I think I
think it's very likely that um the
majority of of cases at least with
regard to Alzheimer's disease um and
likely also even these parkinsonian
conditions which you know it's becoming
increasingly clear that there's an
environmental toxicant aspect to them I
think that the majority um and this is
just my opinion based on my you know
assessment of the literature are likely
preventable we don't have all the data
yet um but I think given what we do
currently know we don't have to sit idly
on our hands you know for example
[Music]